# PPBL Course Section 201.4: Mint Native Assets with a Plutus Script

## Philosophy
The purpose of this lesson is to ignite your need to know more about how Plutus works. We are not going to cover all of the details. We are going to build something that works, and then over the next few weeks, learn how to use it.

What are we building? A **token minting policy**, with Plutus. You'll notice that the process is similar to when we worked with Native Scripts in 201.3: **Minting Native Assets with `cardano-cli`**, and you'll notice some things that are new.

Let's get to it.

## Step 1: Make sure that `/ppbl-course-02` is up to date
- In `/ppbl-course-02`, run `git pull`
- (And while you're at it, be sure to make a new directory in `project-02` for `output`)
```
cd /ppbl-course
git pull
cd /project-02
mkdir output
```

## Step 2: Run `nix-shell` in `/plutus-apps`
- We are still using `v2022-04-06`, but other checkouts should work (for example, if you found that tag `ea1bfc6a49ee731c67ada3bfb326ee798001701a` works best on a Mac M1).
- (Did you update your `nix.conf` file with `flakes` yet?)

## Step 3: Run `cabal repl` in `/ppbl-course-02/project-02`
```
[nix-shell:<YOUR PATH TO>/ppbl-course-02/project-02]$ cabal repl
```

## Step 4: Run `writeMintingValidatorScript` in the repl:
```
Prelude Project02.PlutusMintingCompiler> writeMintingValidatorScript
```

You'll know you're successful if you see:
```
Right()
```

**Congratulations, you just created a minting policy script with Plutus!**

### Ok you're right, it's worth pausing here for a minute.
- Take a look at the contents of `/src/Project02/PlutusMintingScript.hs` and `/src/Project02/PlutusMintingCompiler.hs`

## Step 5: Exit the `repl` and exit `nix-shell`
- Note: `CTRL + D` is the keyboard shortcut for exiting both.

## Step 6: Use the new Plutus Script to mint a token
### 6a: Create a Policy ID
This step is the same as when you're working with Native Scripts:
```
cardano-cli transaction policyid --script-file my-minting-script.plutus
```

### 6b: Create a `redeemer.json` file
This step is new. In `/output`, create a file called `redeemer.json` and paste the following into it:
```
{"constructor":0,"fields":[]}
```

Redeemers are a big deal in Plutus, but this one is not. We just need a placeholder because a Plutus Minting Validator requires a Redeemer.

### 6c: Select a Collateral UTXO
When a Plutus Script is used in a transaction, a "Collateral" UTXO must be specified. [Read about Collateral here](https://docs.cardano.org/plutus/collateral-mechanism).

Choose a UTXO that has approximately 5 ada in it, and that does not include any native assets. If you don't have a UTXO that meets this requirement, review [Module 102.4, to see how to send a transaction to yourself](https://gimbalabs.instructure.com/courses/26/assignments/442?module_item_id=978), and send yourself a UTXO to use as collateral.

### 6d: Build a Minting Transaction, and when your ready Sign and Submit it.

#### Set Variables
```
MINTER=
MINTERKEY=
TXIN=
TXIN2=
COLLATERAL=
POLICYID=
TOKENNAME=
MINTAMOUNT=
SCRIPTFILE="/<PATH TO>/output/my-minting-script.plutus"
REDEEMERFILE="/<PATH TO>/output/redeemer.json"
```

#### Build Transaction
```
cardano-cli transaction build \
--babbage-era \
--testnet-magic 1097911063 \
--tx-in $TXIN \
--tx-out $MINTER+1500000+"$MINTAMOUNT $POLICYID.$TOKENNAME" \
--change-address $MINTER \
--mint "$MINTAMOUNT $POLICYID.$TOKENNAME" \
--mint-script-file $SCRIPTFILE \
--mint-redeemer-file $REDEEMERFILE \
--tx-in-collateral $COLLATERAL \
--protocol-params-file protocol.json \
--out-file mint-token-plutus.raw
```

#### Sign + Submit:
```
cardano-cli transaction sign \
--signing-key-file $MINTERKEY \
--testnet-magic 1097911063 \
--tx-body-file mint-token-plutus.raw \
--out-file mint-token-plutus.signed

cardano-cli transaction submit \
--tx-file mint-token-plutus.signed \
--testnet-magic 1097911063
```

## Assignment:
- Follow the documentation above to mint your own token using the "Always Mints" Plutus Script

## Discussion:
- What would you want your Minting Validator to validate? Write your answer in the discussion below, and be sure to "like" your favorite responses. We'll take the ones with the most upvotes and begin to investigate them in Live Coding.