# PPBL Course Section 201.3: Minting Native Assets with `cardano-cli`

Now that you know how to include native tokens in a transaction (see 201-2), you know a lot about what you need to *mint* new native assets in a similar transaction.

In this lesson, we will build a minting transaction using `cardano-cli`.

## Cardano Scripts

In software development, you can think of a "script" as a set of instructions. Throughout this course, you will be creating and using scripts that provide instructions to the Cardano Protocol. If you're brand new to this idea, don't worry. In this course, you will learn through experience about the differents kinds of scripts, and the different things they can do on Cardano.

## "Native Scripts" and "Plutus Scripts"
At a high level, there are two kinds of scripts that we will use in this course.
1. **Native Scripts**: can be written by hand and used directly in Cardano transactions
2. **Plutus Scripts**: are compiled from Plutus code, and used in Cardano transactions

In this lesson, we will create our first Native Script. In lessons 201.4 and 201.5, we will build and use a Plutus Script. In both cases, our goal for using these scripts is the same: we'd like to mint native assets (aka tokens) on Cardano Testnet.

## Creating a Simple Native Script
Native Scripts consist of a set of rules for taking an action on Cardano. In this case, the action we'd like to take is minting a token. For example, we can write rules defining the signatures required to mint a token. We can also write rules for when a token can or cannot be minted.

Let's write a very simple script that has just one rule: in order to mint a token, a **minting transaction** must be signed by a certain Private Key.

1. Create a new directory named `native-scripts`:
```
mkdir native-scripts
cd native-scripts
```
2. Then, create a new file in that directory called `my-first-policy.script`:
```
touch my-first-policy.script
```
3. Open this file and paste the following inside of it:
```
{
    "keyHash": "22117fbd0f86a213ae4f4d824cd0d38eea29e49764ae22f5f50ba3d3",
    "type": "sig"
}
```
This is a Native Script with one rule. `"type": "sig"` means that the rule specifies a signature required by any transaction using the script. The `keyHash` defines *which* signature is required.

Hopefully you have some questions now! Where does that `keyHash` come from? And "who" does it belong to?

## How to generate a Public Key Hash
You can use `cardano-cli` to generate a `keyHash` by using any Verification Key (aka Public Key).

1. Navigate to the testnet-wallet you created in Module 102.

2. Run the command:

```
cardano-cli address key-hash --payment-verification-key-file payment.vkey
```

3. The output of this command is the Public Key Hash of your Public Key. When you use it in a Native Script, you are writing a rule that your Private Key must sign any transaction that uses that Native Script.

4. Copy and paste this `keyHash` into `my-first-policy.script`, (replacing the `keyHash` that belongs to James) and save the file.

## How to generate a Minting PolicyID:
You can use `cardano-cli` to generate the Policy ID for a brand new native asset. In the same directory as your `my-first-policy.script` file, run this command:

```
cardano-cli transaction policyid --script-file my-first-policy.script
```

Congratulations! You just created a brand new token minting policy that can be used to mint tokens on Cardano!

# That's neat, but how do I actually mint tokens?
To mint a token, you must build a minting transaction. (Make sure that your Cardano Testnet Node is synced.)

This transaction will look similar to the transaction you built in 201.2. We're just going to add a few lines that allow us to mint tokens.

Please follow along with the accompanying video for a walkthrough of this step.

## Set Variables
```
POLICYID=
TXIN=
TOKENNAME1=
TOKENNAME2=
POLICYSCRIPT="<PATH TO>/ppbl-course-02/project-02/native-scripts/my-first-policy.script"
```

## Minting Transaction:
```
cardano-cli transaction build \
--babbage-era \
--testnet-magic 1097911063 \
--tx-in $TXIN \
--tx-out $MINTER+"1500000 + 25 $POLICYID.$TOKENNAME1 + 25 $POLICYID.$TOKENNAME2" \
--mint "25 $POLICYID.$TOKENNAME1 + 25 $POLICYID.$TOKENNAME2" \
--mint-script-file $POLICYSCRIPT \
--change-address $MINTER \
--protocol-params-file protocol.json \
--out-file mint-native-assets.raw

cardano-cli transaction sign \
--signing-key-file $MINTERKEY \
--testnet-magic 1097911063 \
--tx-body-file mint-native-assets.raw \
--out-file mint-native-assets.signed

cardano-cli transaction submit \
--tx-file mint-native-assets.signed \
--testnet-magic 1097911063

```

## Create Some Bad Transactions
Just like we saw in 201.2, the --tx-out must balance all native assets. Before we submit a successful transaction, let's try to create a few minting transactions that do not work.

## Think about this:
We just created a new minting policy by using keys that had already been used to build a Cardano Testnet address. However, in order to use keys in a minting policy, it is not necessary for those keys to have a Cardano *address* associated with them. You can simply create a new set of keys, and then create a `keyHash` from those. This is a common approach in many projects involving Cardano tokens.

## Read these official docs:
Here is some official (but imperfect) documentation about minting native assets on Cardano: https://developers.cardano.org/docs/native-tokens/minting/. Read through this documentation to check your understanding of this lesson.

---

# Independent Project: Create a "Multi-Sig" Minting Policy
- How would you create a Minting Policy that requires multiple signatures for minting some tokens?
- We will discuss this question in an upcoming Live Coding Session (July 27/28 or August 3/4)